When auditioning to be President Trump’s Treasury secretary,
 Scott Bessent accused Democrats of constructing a centrally
  planned economy. He argued that their interventions in markets
   were politically motivated and said the sitting Treasury
    secretary, Janet L. Yellen, was purposely changing how
     government bonds were being sold to stimulate the economy
      before the 2024 election.

“History teaches us that prioritizing free enterprise and limiting
 government’s role in the economy are key to raising living
  standards,” Mr. Bessent said at a Manhattan Institute conference.

Two years later, as Treasury secretary, Mr. Bessent is seeking his
 own interventions into the markets and the economy in ways that
  conflict with his stated philosophy. Since entering the White
   House, the second Trump administration has taken equity stakes in
    more than two dozen companies and subsidized the U.S. critical
     minerals industry. A former skeptic of tariffs, Mr. Bessent 
     last week called the taxes that the government collected from
      companies for their imports “the people’s money.”

But global anxiety about America’s heavy, sustained borrowing and
 the war in Iran has been impossible to obscure, and Mr. Bessent is
  starting to see the limits of his powers to bend the global economy
   to his will.

This week, six months into a war with Iran that has exacerbated
 inflation, the Treasury secretary unveiled a new round of economic
  warfare that he billed as D-Day and Operation Economic Outcast.
   It largely amounted to a warning to other nations that they would
    face U.S. sanctions if they did not cut ties with Iran.

Mr. Bessent also tried to meddle this month in global financial
 markets as part of an effort to lower interest rates. He did so by
  announcing surprising interventions in currency and bond markets
   and by signaling that the U.S. government was prepared to take
    further action.

When markets rejected his move — which even his mentor, the investor
 Stanley Druckenmiller, panned as senseless — he used his megaphone
 to make the case that investors were misguided about the
  fundamentals of the U.S. economy. Mr. Bessent is pushing to curb
   long term bond yields and allay fears about America’s $40
    trillion debt burden.

“He’s trying to see if he can persuade the markets by flicking
 his wrist to bring them to command,” said Kenneth Rogoff,
  a Harvard University economics professor.

The strategy of jawboning markets is not new. For decades political
 leaders facing looming debt crises have attempted to talk their
  way out of trouble.

Silvio Berlusconi, the former Italian prime minister, tried
 unsuccessfully to alleviate concerns about Italy’s debt problems
  during Europe’s 2011 debt crisis before ultimately stepping down
   as bond yields soared. In Britain, former Prime Minister Liz Truss
    was unable to convince markets that economic growth would cure
     her economy’s fiscal problems. She was forced to step down after
      a month and a half amid market backlash.

“He has a lot of credibility, but he’s spending it on this,”
 Mr. Rogoff said of Mr. Bessent.